Prep 1

RESPECT, INTEGRITY, AND NON-VIOLENCE
Winning games is important to every coach. However, it shouldn’t be the only goal. A big part of the job is helping to develop solid, responsible athletes who are able to become upstanding citizens. Coaching Boys into Men (CBIM) equips coaches with tools to help their young athletes build respectful, non-violent relationships.

CBIM PLAYBOOK

Prep 1
Familiarize yourself with the CBIM Playbook. It’s the foundation of the program and an essential tool that includes:
• Facts and information about relationship violence and abuse;
• Teachable moment scenarios;
• Tips and tactics on how to talk to your athletes.

CBIM CARD SERIES
Use the Card Series to lead weekly
discussions with your athletes throughout
the season. The set includes:

Prep Cards to help you get ready for the
season.

Training Cards, each with a key topic
for you to discuss with your athletes
each week (at least 10 – 15 minutes per
week).

Halftime and Overtime Cards to use
throughout the season to gain greater
exposure for your team’s commitment.
Teachable Moment Card to help you
respond to harmful behavior or
language.

PREPARE FOR TEACHABLE MOMENTS

As a coach you have both an offensive
game plan and a defensive one. It’s
important to be proactive by going on
the offensive and conducting weekly
trainings with your athletes. It’s equally
important to be reactive by building a
defensive plan to respond to disrespectful
situations that may arise among your
players. When you see or hear a serious
problem, use the Teachable Moment Card to
address it immediately and take the
opportunity to reinforce and model
positive language and behavior.

REFERENCES & RESOURCES
Some Training Cards cite additional
resources that can be found in the
CBIM Playbook or Coaches Kit. Refer
to these References & Resources for
more information to help you lead the
program effectively.

COACHESCORNER.ORG
Visit www.CoachesCorner.org for tips from
your fellow coaches, success stories
from the field, and general program

PREP 2

RECRUIT ALLIES

Involve your community and inform
them of the commitment your team is
making. This will enhance your
program’s success. We encourage you
to work with the following audiences
to increase school wide awareness and
support for Coaching Boys into Men:
Principal
Athletic Director
Coaches (in and out of school)
Parents
School newspaper, local sports
reporter, or other local media

Before the season begins, invite
these allies to support you in the
implementation of Coaching Boys into
Men, and continue to involve them
week after week.

Share copies of the Coaching Boys into Men
Overview, using it as a way to introduce
anyone to the program.
updates.

RESOURCES
Learn your school district’s policies
and legal responsibilities. In cases
involving issues of harassment, abuse, or
physical and sexual violence, there may
be reporting requirements you are
mandated to follow.
When you feel something is more
serious than you can handle, there are
experts and resources available to you
and your athletes. Refer to the Need Help
list in your Coaches Kit.
The National Domestic Violence
Hotline is available 24 hours a day,
7 days a week for anonymous help.
They can be reached at 1-800-799-SAFE
(7233) or at www.ndvh.org.
Ask your school counselor for contact
information for local resources such as:
Statewide or local domestic
violence or sexual assault agencies
School and community teen
programs
Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender
and queer (LGBTQ) youth
organizations

LEAD BRIEF WEEKLY CBIM
TRAININGS

USING THE CARD SERIES
Although each training is intended to be
brief, it’s the repetition of the message and
consistency of the lessons that will yield the
greatest impact. Follow the guidelines below
– evidence has shown this results in the
greatest success for your athletes.
Throughout the season, go through the
twelve Training Cards, in order, with your
team; take at least 10–15 minutes, once a
week, per card. To ensure your athletes will
be receptive, set aside a consistent weekly
time that fits your team’s schedule.
Review the Objectives for each lesson to get
prepared for the focus of that day’s training.
Gather your athletes and start the
training with the Warm Up. You can read the
sample language as a speech directly from the
card or tailor it as you like. The Warm Up
helps get your athletes focused on the
training topic.
Next, Ask the Players the suggested questions
keeping in mind the Discussion Points & Wrap Up
included to facilitate the conversation. Create
a respectful, safe environment where your
athletes can share their ideas freely and ask
honest questions. Give them time to answer
and most importantly, make sure they know
you’re listening and care about what they
have to say.
Close each training with the Discussion Points
& Wrap Up. This closure will help reinforce the
session’s objectives and key points.


ADAPTING CBIM TO YOU AND YOUR TEAM
The guidelines listed above provide the
framework for delivering the program, but
the specific method is up to you. You know
your athletes best.

Here are a few suggestions:
Use your voice and your style; your
athletes are used to hearing that and
responding. Choose examples that are
relevant to your team – from their sport,
the community, or current events.
Be creative. If field or court time is
unavailable, hold your CBIM trainings in a
classroom or use the time spent traveling
together on road trips.
Enlist your assistant coaches and ask
them to deliver a lesson or two. Your
athletes may benefit from hearing these
important messages from multiple adults
whom they look up to and admire.
Encourage your team captains or the
upperclassmen on your team to reinforce
the importance of the CBIM trainings by
modeling respectful behavior to their
teammates.
Refer to the Halftime and Overtime cards
throughout the season to bring your team’s
CBIM commitment to the community at
large.


PRE-SEASON SPEECH

This training will help athletes:
1. Understand your expectations and ground
rules for the upcoming season, such as
arriving on time, maintaining equipment, etc.
2. Anticipate upcoming CBIM program
trainings focusing on respect for women and
girls throughout the season.

Warm Up

Since this is the start
of the season, I want to talk about
your responsibilities on this team and
my expectations of you. This season
we’ll not only be focusing on your
development as athletes, but also on
your development as young men.
This includes how you carry yourself
and how you treat others, particularly
women and girls like your girlfriend or
your sister. Periodically, I want to talk
to you guys about some of these things
and focus on how we can better
show respect to ourselves, your
teammates, and others.

Ask the Players

1. What does respect mean to you?
2. How can you show respect to your

teammates?

3. How can you show respect to your

friends and family? Your girlfriend?

4. How do you show respect even

to people you don’t know, like at a
restaurant or at the mall?

Discussion Points & Wrap Up


• I care about how you act on and off
the field.

• Respectful behavior means treating
others how they want to be treated.

• Showing true respect involves
everything you do – how you speak,
how you act, how you think, and the way you
present yourself to others.
As athletes, people will watch you, and
many will look up to you – the language
you use, how you act, and how you treat
other people is very important.
I want you to keep up with your
schoolwork, be polite to your
teachers, and respect women and girls.


PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY

This training will help athletes:
1. Recognize the consequences of their
behavior and how their language and
conduct reflect on themselves, the team,
and others.
2. Accept responsibility and hold
themselves accountable for their actions.

Warm Up

Last week we went over
some of the things I expect you guys
to be responsible for, such as getting
to practice on time, working hard,
and keeping yourselves and our
equipment in good shape.
I also want you guys to be
accountable for your actions.
You are the person responsible
and accountable for everything
you say and do – in sports and
in your everyday life.

Ask the Players

1. What does it mean to be responsible
for your actions on the field?

2. How do your actions off the field
represent the team, your school, and your
community?

3. How do you hold yourself accountable
off the field?

Discussion Points & Wrap Up

Be a team player. This means respecting
your teammates, displaying good
sportsmanship, and being in control of
your own actions.

You reflect our team, our school, the
community, and your family and friends.
Accountability means holding yourself
responsible – and that is something that
you, and only you, can do.

One thing we’re going to focus on this
season is that there are real consequences
for yourself and others when you don’t
treat people with respect.


DISRESPECTFUL BEHAVIOR
TOWARDS WOMEN & GIRLS

This training will help athletes:
1. Recognize how certain behavior towards
women and girls can be hurtful, scary, or
even violating.
2. Refuse to engage in lewd or foul behavior
such as catcalling, whistling, sexual
innuendo, or harassment.

Warm Up

You know from prior
talks that it’s important to me
for all of us to treat women
and girls with respect.
Sometimes guys
just think they’re being
funny or cool and don’t
realize that their behavior
is actually disrespectful or
even threatening.



Ask the Players

1. What is disrespectful behavior towards

women and girls? What are some examples?

2. Have you ever heard guys calling out to

girls about how they look or what they’re
wearing?

3. Have you heard guys describing girls as

stupid or weak?

4. How do you think these insults might make

someone feel? Why could this be hurtful?

5. How could you use respectful language to

compliment a girl?

Discussion Points & Wrap Up


• Disrespectful behavior can be hurtful and
frightening. Even if someone laughs it off,
chances are they didn’t find it funny at all.

Whether it’s that we want people to think
we’re smart, funny, or athletic, we all want to
be liked and respected – both guys and girls.
No one wants to be insulted or harassed.

Guys might think they’re being funny or
cool when commenting on a girl’s clothing,
makeup, or overall appearance – they’re not.
They might even think she is asking for these
unwanted comments, but that’s wrong too.
No one asks to be harassed or singled out
because of how they look.

Describing girls as stupid or weak reinforces
a stereotype that females are inferior. That is
unacceptable.

If you like the way someone looks, go up
and tell him/her in a mature and respectful way.


DIGITAL DISRESPECT

This training will help athletes:
1. Recognize that the actions they take online
and on their cell phone have real consequences.
2. Refuse to participate in abusive or
controlling digital behavior including sending
repeated and unwanted text messages, violating
someone’s privacy, or pressuring someone for a
naked, private, or embarrassing picture.
3. Create safe and respectful digital spaces for
themselves and others.

Warm Up

We’ve talked about how the
words you use and the actions you
take can be disrespectful or harmful to
others. This goes for what you do online
and on your cell phones, too. Sometimes
we minimize the seriousness of things
when we’re not face to face with
someone. Sometimes we don’t realize
that our text messages can be controlling,
overwhelming, or mean. What happens
online is real and sometimes very
public for all the world to see. Friendships
and dating relationships are shaped by
what we do and what we say – no
matter where it takes place. It’s important
that we use technology safely
and respectfully.

Ask the Players

1. What are some benefits of things like

social networking, chatting, and texting?
What are some not so great things?

2. How would you feel if someone posted private

or embarrassing comments about you online?

3. How might your girlfriend feel if you

constantly sent her texts asking where she is,
who she’s with, what she’s wearing, and what
she’s doing?

4. How would you feel if someone repeatedly

pressured you to do something you didn’t want
to do, like sending a nude or private picture?

Discussion Points & Wrap Up


keep in
• Digital communication helps us keep in 
touch with others, but it can also make boundaries
unclear. Talk with your partner about
what you think is okay and not okay behavior.

Everyone needs space sometimes. Be
respectful of what other people are okay with
over text message, and be clear about what’s
okay with you. Sometimes it’s not just the
number of texts being sent or received but
the content of the messages that really matter.

It is NEVER okay to pressure someone for
a nude or private picture. It’s also wrong to
share these pictures with other people. Send-
ing nude pictures has serious consequences
and some teens have even faced criminal
charges. If you receive a nude picture, delete
it immediately and tell an adult you trust.

Pressure, control, or threats are NEVER
okay whether online or not.

What you say and do online is a reflection
of you, and of this team.


UNDERSTANDING CONSENT

This training will help athletes:
1. Discuss and respect personal boundaries
around intimate and sexual activities to
create healthy, safe relationships and
situations.
2. Refuse to use pressure, threats, or force
in any physical or sexual encounter.
3. Actively oppose and prevent incidents of
rape, sexual coercion and assault.

Warm Up

Communication can be
challenging in any relationship, but
never is it more critical than in a
physically intimate or sexual situation.
Whether with someone you like and
know or with someone you just met,
it’s extremely important that you openly
discuss and respect personal boundaries.
Create space for you and that person to
talk about what you’re comfortable with.
If either of you feels unsure, uncomfort-
able, or is unable to really make the
decision to get involved, that must be
respected. Intimate and sexual situations
should always be safe, sober,
and non-violent.


Ask the Players

1. What does consent mean?
2. What are ways pressure and threats can

be used to make someone do something they
don’t want to do?

3. How do you determine consent? What

if you’re not sure what your date or partner
feels comfortable with?

4. What can you do if you notice someone in

a dangerous or non-consensual situation?

Discussion Points & Wrap Up

• Consent means that after thoughtful 
consideration, both you and your partner agree
to and feel comfortable and safe with a specific
situation. Consent for one thing, like a hug,
doesn’t mean consent for another, like a kiss.

Ask and listen to what the other person
wants. If anyone feels unsure or uncomfort-
able, show respect and STOP the situation.

It is NEVER okay to use pressure or threats
to coerce someone into a sexual situation.

Drugs and alcohol can impair judgement
and create dangerous situations. If someone
can’t consent and say “YES”, it’s not safe to be
physically or sexually intimate. STOP
immediately so you both stay safe.

If someone says “NO” in any sexual
situation, it means NO. To ignore it is
wrong and against the law.

Intimate and sexual situations should
always be consensual, safe, and respectful.
Talking about desires and concerns will help
you both feel comfortable.


ENLIST YOUR LOCAL
SPORTS REPORTER

• Tell your school newspaper or your local 
sports reporter about the CBIM program 
and team’s focus on strengthening respect for
women and girls.

• The community should know that your ,
athletes not only perform well on the field 
but are upstanding young men off the field, too.

Your athletes will be proud to see that the
community is recognizing their commitment.

This is a great way to involve the broader
community and provide other opportunities
for your athletes to model respectful behavior.

BRAGGING ABOUT SEXUAL
REPUTATION

This training will help athletes:
1. Recognize that bragging or lying about
their sexual reputation doesn’t prove or
improve their masculinity.

2. Recognize that spreading stories about
someone else’s sexual activity can be
disrespectful and harmful.

3. Refuse to spread private information
or to speak disrespectfully about another
person’s sexual reputation.

Warm Up

I know that there’s a lot
of pressure to be popular and
act like you’re an expert with girls.
Some people think this means
bragging about what you and
your friends may do sexually.
The men I respect treat women
and girls as their equal. They
don’t joke, lie, or brag about
what they do intimately
with anybody.

Ask the Players

1. Who are you disrespecting when you lie

or brag about your sexual reputation?

2. Why might someone involved in your

stories not appreciate your storytelling?

3. Why is it disrespectful to listen to or laugh

when a friend is talking about what he does
sexually with his girlfriend?

Discussion Points & Wrap Up

• You guys might be feeling pressure to act 
like an expert with girls, but bragging or lying
about sex or intimate experiences isn’t the
way to do it. It’s not only disrespectful to the
girl; broadcasting your personal life like that
disrespects yourself, too.

Whether it’s true or not, it can be harmful to
talk or spread rumors about someone’s sexual
reputation. They may become depressed,
isolated, or even put in danger by those
comments. My opinion is that such information
shouldn’t be shared. When you hear stories
about someone’s sexual experiences, don’t
laugh or encourage it. It’s best to ask the
person to stop or leave the situation.

I know sex and sexuality can be
uncomfortable to talk about. If you have
questions, discuss them respectfully with
someone you trust and let them know you
want them to keep it private.

The men I look up to care about the
women in their lives. They treat women with
respect and don’t publicize the intimate
details of their relationships and friendships.

THE RESPONSIBILITY OF
PHYSICAL STRENGTH

This training will help athletes:
1. Recognize the power and responsibility
of having physical strength.
2. Decide when it’s appropriate or
inappropriate to use physical strength.

Warm Up

Strength is an
important element in any
sport. We all train and practice
to be stronger and faster for
the game. However, there is
always going to be someone
stronger or weaker than you.
We need to be careful
not to misuse or abuse
our strength in our
everyday lives.

Ask the Players

1. How can physical strength help you
in the game?

2. In what ways is this strength also a
responsibility?

3. What is an example of when you
should not use physical strength?

Discussion Points & Wrap Up


• You all train to become stronger and
faster. It’s essential for success on the field.

• Strength and power are controlled
in sports through rules and penalties.
However, off the field it’s your responsibility
to be in control.

It’s never okay to use your size and
strength as a way to threaten, intimidate,
or harm another person, whether it’s your
teammate, classmate, or girlfriend.

Use your physical strength in positive
ways, such as helping others.


WHEN AGGRESSION
CROSSES THE LINE

This training will help athletes:
1. Recognize different degrees of
aggression on and off the field.

2. Identify when they are becoming
aggressive.

3. Adjust their behavior when they feel
themselves becoming too aggressive.

Warm Up

In our game, winning
not only requires physical
strength, but at times it also
requires aggressiveness.
Sometimes, we even want to
intimidate our opponent to get that
extra edge; but even this must be
done within bounds. Things can
go too far if you’re not in control
of your emotions. This is also true
outside the competition in your
everyday lives.


Ask the Players

1. How does aggression help you in the
game? What are the rules of the game that
control aggression?
2. How do you feel when you become more
aggressive during a game?
3. What problems can being too aggressive
cause outside the game?
4. What are some suggestions for
controlling aggression?

Discussion Points & Wrap Up

 
• Sports require aggression. The goal is often 
to dominate and intimidate your opponent.

• But in sports, aggression is controlled by
rules. If you break them, you could be 
penalized or even ejected. The same is true
off the field.

We all have moments when we become
frustrated or angry but this should never lead
you to be violent or abusive.

Like in the game, there can be serious
consequences if you lose control and become
too aggressive in real life. Abuse or violence
can result in losing your relationship or even
legal consequences like going to jail.

Learn to recognize when you’re becoming
overly aggressive and think about what you
need to do to cool down. It could be taking a
deep breath, talking it over with your friends,
or doing something you enjoy to take your
mind off the situation.

Always remember that violence doesn’t
equal strength.

THERE’S NO EXCUSE FOR
RELATIONSHIP ABUSE

This training will help athletes:
1. Reject the use of pressure or intimidation
in their relationships and friendships.
2. Refer back to tools on how to monitor
aggression and determine when it crosses
the line.
3. Refuse to become abusive or violent in
their relationships.

Warm Up

We’ve talked this
season about aggression,
physical strength, and respect.
I also want to talk about
relationships and how problems will
inevitably come up – and that’s ok,
it’s natural. But, we must deal with
them in a positive and healthy way.
Sometimes people use pressure to
force someone into doing something
they don’t want to do. They may
even use violence to control their
girlfriend or boyfriend, but it’s never
okay. Never. There are better
ways to handle any issue
that may arise.

Ask the Players

1. How can you tell someone that you

don’t like the way they’re treating you or
someone else?

2. What are non-violent ways to deal with

relationship problems or differences?

Discussion Points & Wrap Up

• In any relationship, there will be issues
and disagreements, but that is never an
excuse for violence.

It’s never right to be physically, verbally,
or sexually abusive towards another
person, period.

Any time you witness abuse, learn
about it occurring, or if you experience
it yourself, you should report it to me or
another trusted adult such as a teacher or
parent immediately.

When a woman or girl says “NO” in any
sexual situation, it means NO. To ignore it
is WRONG and it’s AGAINST THE LAW.

Respecting the physical and emotional
boundaries and desires of others will help
you build strong and healthy relationships
throughout your life.


MODELING RESPECTFUL
BEHAVIOR TOWARDS WOMEN
AND GIRLS

This training will help athletes:
1. Treat others how they want to be treated.
2. Model respectful behavior towards
women and girls in language and actions
(e.g., refuse to laugh at or support
disrespectful jokes).
3. Notice and support teammates’ or
friends’ respectful behavior.

Warm Up

I’m proud of this team.
You’ve done a great job
representing us on and off the
field. You’ve been willing to consider
hard questions about what’s okay, or
not okay, in your relationships. You
may not realize it, but you’re all role
models at this school. You’ve really
stepped up and I want you guys to
support each other and remind each
other to be respectful towards
others. As we’ve discussed, this
includes treating women and girls
with respect. You are growing up to
be men I admire.



Ask the Players

1. What are ways you can show respect in

your relationships with women and girls?

2. How can you watch out for each other

and make sure your teammates are
responsible on and off the field?

3. What can you do if you hear your friend

being disrespectful towards a girl or another
person?

4. As someone other players and students look

up to in this school, what are ways you can
share these principles of respect with others?

Discussion Points & Wrap Up


• You can show respect to others in many
ways, like valuing and supporting their 
personal boundaries, decisions, and individuality.
By showing respect towards women and
girls in your language and actions, you’re not
only doing the right thing, you’re setting an
example for others.

If you witness one of your teammates using
inappropriate language or behavior or being
disrespectful to a girl, don’t join in on it. CALL
HIM ON IT.

If you witness a situation and it makes you
feel unsafe, don’t get involved directly. Ask an
adult for help.

Think of ways you can share the principles
of respect – teamwork, responsibility, integrity,
non-violence – with your community.

You are all part of something positive at this
school. Your commitment to respect is also a
responsibility – defend it and share it.


SIGNING THE PLEDGE

This training will help athletes:
1. Actively affirm their and the team’s
collective commitment against relationship
abuse.
2. Serve as public examples of respect
towards others, particularly women and girls.

Warm Up

This season you’ve
all been great athletes and
team players. I’ve also been
impressed with your leadership in
showing respect for others.
You guys are becoming great
players in the game and are
turning out to be great men in life.
I respect each of you for treating
women and girls with honor and
respect. In recognition of the
commitment you’ve all made,
I want us to read and sign
this Pledge together.

Coach and Player Pledge

I commit to take a stand against
relationship abuse and I believe that
violence is neither a solution nor a sign
of strength. I understand that by treating
everyone with respect, I am a role model
to others. By taking this pledge, I publicly
denounce violence against women and
girls. A world of respect starts today and
starts with me.

Discussion Points & Wrap Up

• We will sign and post this pledge
in the gyms or school hallway so your 
commitment will be known and
recognized.

This is the beginning, not the end.
You know that I share this commitment
with you and I want you to come by my
office anytime for advice, to ask questions,
or to discuss any situation that might
come up.



HOST A FAN PLEDGE DAY

• Make your team’s next home game a
Fan Pledge Day!

• During pre-game or halftime, use the loud
speaker to announce your team’s commitment
to respecting others, particularly women and
girls. Encourage fans to sign Pledge Cards that
your team can distribute before the game.

Have your players collect Pledges from
the fans. It will be a good way to help them
engage with others about their commitment.

Create a CBIM board where you display all
collected pledges. Be sure to feature the board
in a public place (e.g. gym, hallway).

Your players will be the stars of the game
and of the community for their public promise
to respect others.

Make an even greater impact! Ask your
fans to donate to a local domestic violence
shelter or violence prevention organization
in your community!

CREATE A TEAM CAMPAIGN

• Have your athletes create their own 
messages, posters, video, or web page that
describe the principles of the program and
their role in showing and encouraging respect
on and off the field.

Post these messages in a public place
like in the auditorium, the gym, the cafeteria,
or the hallways of the school.

Involve your campus radio station or daily
public announcements to broadcast your
team’s CBIM message of respect for women
and girls to the entire school community.


HOW TO HANDLE A
TEACHABLE MOMENT

Step 1: STOP

You just noticed disrespectful or
damaging behavior. What happened?
What did you hear? What did you see?

Step 2: CALL A TIME OUT

If it’s appropriate at that time to share
with the team as a whole, then take a
few minutes to bring everyone together.
Recap what you witnessed and tell the
athletes that this was wrong. Sometimes,
situations occur that require you to
address the individual in a one-on-one
conversation or in a more private manner.

Step 3: DEFENSE

Correct the language and behavior by
explaining WHY it was wrong, referencing
some of the trainings throughout the
season. Whenever possible, make the
moment a lesson for the entire team.

Step 4: GO ON THE OFFENSE

Make sure your athletes understand how
the incident relates to the principles of
respect. Ask them to suggest ways the
incident could have been prevented.
What positive alternatives were available?


* It’s also important to take a time out to
commend positive, respectful behavior!